docs(release-notes): add 8.9 release notes (#5453)
canonical/snapcraft: docs/release-notes/snapcraft-8-9.rst

.. _release-8.9:

Snapcraft 8.9 release notes
===========================

12 May 2025

Learn about the new features, changes, and fixes introduced in Snapcraft 8.9.

Requirements and compatibility
------------------------------

See :ref:`reference-system-requirements` for information on the minimum hardware and
installed software.

What's new
----------

Snapcraft 8.9 brings the following features, integrations, and improvements.

> ``snapcraft test``

Author: I like that better. Updated.

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> A new command called ``test``, and its accompanying ``init`` profile, are available for
> testing snaps. They leverage `Spread`_ to run identically on local and remote systems.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A new command called ``test``, and its accompanying ``init`` profile, are available for
testing snaps. They leverage `Spread`_ to run tests identically on local and remote systems.
```

Author: Updated.

The command is experimental and subject to change. To try it on an existing snap
project, run ``snapcraft init --profile=test`` at the root of your project directory.
For a description of the command and its options, see the :ref:`test command
<ref_commands_test>` reference.

Cargo use plugin
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> We added a plugin that sets up a local `cargo registry`_ for `Rust`_ crates. These

Reviewer: I think this would be more useful if it linked to crate documentation rather than the Rust homepage. I'm not sure if this is the best possible document, but something like:

```
`Rust crates <https://doc.rust-lang.org/book/ch07-01-packages-and-crates.html>`_

Author: Updated.  My only concern is if that link will die if their docs get re-ordered but our workflow should catch the broken link.

crates can then be used by the existing :ref:`Rust plugin <craft_parts_rust_plugin>`.
See the :ref:`craft_parts_cargo_use_plugin` reference for details.

Gradle plugin
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Previously, Snapcraft supported the `Gradle`_ build tool for core18 snaps.

Support for Gradle is now available for core22 and core24 snaps with a new Gradle
plugin. See the :ref:`craft_parts_gradle_plugin` reference for details.

Documentation migration and redesign
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> Previously, Snapcraft's documentation was hosted on `snapcraft.io
> <http://snapcraft.io/docs>`_ and edited via forum posts. The documentation has been
> migrated to :doc:`Read the Docs </index>` and is hosted in Snapcraft's repository.
> 
> The documentation was redesigned to follow `Diátaxis <https://diataxis.fr/>`_.
> It has a similar design to documentation from other Canonical products and
> is versioned and released alongside Snapcraft itself.

Reviewer 2: Taking a stab at this:

```suggestion
Previously, the main source of Snapcraft documentation was hosted on a Discourse
instance at `snapcraft.io <http://snapcraft.io/docs>`_.

With Snapcraft 8.9, the essential documentation was shifted to ReadTheDocs and is now
hosted inside the Snapcraft repository. In the process, much of the documentation was
reorganized and rewritten to closely follow the `Diátaxis framework
<https://diataxis.fr>`_.

The documentation now aligns more closely with the learning experience of all Canonical
products. It's also versioned with each Snapcraft release.

We're working to retire the remaining documentation on snapcraft.io.
```

Author: I did my best here but I knew you'd reword this :)

Minor features
--------------

Snapcraft 8.9 brings the following minor changes.

Support for Maven wrappers
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The Maven plugin now supports the ``maven-use-wrapper`` key to indicate that the build
should use the wrapper provided by the source code. See the
:ref:`craft_parts_maven_plugin` reference for details.

Backwards-incompatible changes
------------------------------

The following changes are incompatible with previous versions of Snapcraft.

Renaming of confdb schema commands
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A confdb schema defines the configuration of Linux systems, including storage,
access permission, granularity, and sharing between snaps.

The existing confdb schema commands have been renamed. The commands
``list-confdb-schemas`` and ``edit-confdb-schema`` replace the previous

> ``list-confdbs`` and ``edit-confdbs`` commands, respectively.

Reviewer 2: Might be easier to skim as a small table.

Author: Updated.
